@c Copyright (C) 1998 Eleftherios Gkioulekas <lf@amath.washington.edu>
@c  
@c Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
@c this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
@c are preserved on all copies.
@c  
@c Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
@c results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
@c notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
@c (this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@c  
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
@c manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
@c entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a 
@c permission notice identical to this one.
@c  
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
@c into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
@c except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
@c approved by the Free Software Foundation
@c  

@node Acknowledgements, Copying, Preface, Top
@unnumbered Acknowledgements


@noindent
This document and the Autotools package have originally been written by
Eleftherios Gkioulekas. Many people have further contributed to this
effort, directly or indirectly, in various way. Here is a list of these 
people. Please help me keep it complete and exempt of errors.

@itemize @bullet
@item
The appendix @emph{Philosophical issues} 
has been written by Richard Stallman. 
(@pxref{Philosophical issues})
@item
The chapter on Fortran, and the Autotools support for developing software
that is partly written in Fortran is derived from the work of John Eaton
on GNU Octave, which I mainly generalized for use in other programs.
(@pxref{Fortran with Autoconf}).
@item
Mark Galassi was the first person, to the best of my knowledge, who tried to
write an Autoconf tutorial. It is thanks to his work that I was inspired to
begin this work.
@end itemize

FIXME: @emph{I need to start keeping track of acknowledgements here}
