@c Copyright (C) 1998 Eleftherios Gkioulekas <lf@amath.washington.edu>
@c  
@c Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
@c this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
@c are preserved on all copies.
@c  
@c Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
@c results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
@c notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
@c (this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@c  
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
@c manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
@c entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a 
@c permission notice identical to this one.
@c  
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
@c into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
@c except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
@c approved by the Free Software Foundation
@c  

@node Maintaining Documentation, Legal issues with Free Software, Fortran with Autoconf, Top
@chapter Maintaining Documentation

@menu
* Writing proper manuals::      
* Introduction to Texinfo::     
* Markup in Texinfo::           
* GNU Emacs support for Texinfo::  
* Writing documentation with LaTeX::  
* Creating a LaTeX package::    
* Further reading about LaTeX::  
@end menu

@node Writing proper manuals, Introduction to Texinfo, Maintaining Documentation, Maintaining Documentation
@section Writing proper manuals

@emph{FIXME: Advice on how to write a good manual}
@emph{General stuff. Reference manual vs user manual.}
@emph{When to write a manual.}
@emph{How to structure a manual.}
@emph{Texinfo vs. Latex}
@emph{Copyright issues.}

@node Introduction to Texinfo, Markup in Texinfo, Writing proper manuals, Maintaining Documentation
@section Introduction to Texinfo

@node Markup in Texinfo, GNU Emacs support for Texinfo, Introduction to Texinfo, Maintaining Documentation
@section Markup in Texinfo

@node GNU Emacs support for Texinfo, Writing documentation with LaTeX, Markup in Texinfo, Maintaining Documentation
@section GNU Emacs support for Texinfo

@node Writing documentation with LaTeX, Creating a LaTeX package, GNU Emacs support for Texinfo, Maintaining Documentation
@section Writing documentation with LaTeX

@node Creating a LaTeX package, Further reading about LaTeX, Writing documentation with LaTeX, Maintaining Documentation
@section Creating a LaTeX package

@node Further reading about LaTeX,  , Creating a LaTeX package, Maintaining Documentation
@section Further reading about LaTeX

