@c Copyright (C) 1998 Eleftherios Gkioulekas <lf@amath.washington.edu>
@c  
@c Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
@c this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
@c are preserved on all copies.
@c  
@c Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
@c results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
@c notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
@c (this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@c  
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
@c manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
@c entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a 
@c permission notice identical to this one.
@c  
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
@c into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
@c except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
@c approved by the Free Software Foundation
@c  

@node Preface, Acknowledgements, Top, Top
@unnumbered Preface

The purpose of this document is to introduce you to the GNU build system,
and show you how to use it to write good code. 
It also discusses peripheral
topics such as how to use GNU Emacs as a source code navigator, how
to write good software, and the philosophical concerns behind the free
software movement. The intended reader should
be a software developer who knows his programming languages, and
wants to learn how to package his programs in a way that follows the
GNU coding standards.


This manual introduces you to the GNU build system and showes you how
to develop high-quality 

This manual shows you how to develop high-quality software on GNU using
the GNU build system that conforms to the GNU coding standards. 
These techniques are also useful for software development on GNU/Linux
and most variants of the Unix system. In fact, one of the reasons
for the elaborate GNU build system was to make software portable between
GNU and other similar operating systems.
We also discuss peripheral topics such as how to use GNU
Emacs as an IDE (integrated development environment), and the various
practical, legal and philosophical concerns behind software development.

When we speak of the @dfn{GNU build system} we refer primarily to the
following four packages:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@strong{Autoconf} produces a @dfn{configuration shell script}, named 
@file{configure}, which probes the installer platform for portability related
information which is required to customize makefiles, configuration header
files, and other application specific files. Then it proceeds to generate
customized versions of these files from generic templates. This way, the
user will not need to customize these files manually.
@item
@strong{Automake} produces makefile templates, @file{Makefile.in} to be used
by Autoconf, from a very high level specification stored in a file called
@file{Makefile.am}. Automake produces makefiles that conform to the GNU
makefile standards, taking away the extraordinary effort required to produce
them by hand. Automake requires Autoconf in order to be used properly.
@item
@strong{Libtool} makes it possible to compile position indepedent code and
build shared libraries in a portable manner. It does not require either
Autoconf, or Automake and can be used indepedently. Automake however supports
libtool and interoperates with it in a seamless manner.
@item
@strong{Autotools} 
@emph{FIXME: Add content}
@end itemize

The GNU build system has two goals. The first is to simplify the development
of portable programs. The second is to simplify the building of programs that
are distributed as source code. The first goal is achieved by the automatic
generation of a @file{configure} shell script. The second goal is achieved
by the automatic generation of Makefiles and other shell scripts that are
typically used in the building process. This way the developer can concentrate
on debugging his source code, instead of his overly complex Makefiles.
And the installer can compile and install the program directly from the 
source code distribution by a simple and automatic procedure.

The GNU build system needs to be installed only when you are developing
programs that are meant to be distributed. To build a program from 
distributed source code, you only need a working @code{make}, a compiler, 
a shell,
and sometimes standard Unix utilities like @code{sed}, @code{awk},
@code{yacc}, @code{lex}. The objective is to make software installation
as simple and as automatic as possible for the installer. Also, by
setting up the GNU build system such that it creates programs that don't
require the build system to be present during their installation, it 
becomes possible to use the build system to bootstrap itself. 

Some tasks that are simplified by the GNU build system include:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Building multidirectory software packages. It is much more difficult to use
raw @code{make} recursively. Having simplified this step, the developer
is encouraged to organize his source code in a deep directory tree rather than
lump everything under the same directory. Developers that use raw @code{make}
often can't justify the inconvenience of recursive make and prefer to
disorganize their source code. With the GNU tools this is no longer necessary.
@item
Automatic configuration. You will never have to tell your users that they
need to edit your Makefile. You yourself will not have to edit your Makefiles
as you move new versions of your code back and forth between different
machines.
@item
Automatic makefile generation. Writing makefiles involves a lot of repetition,
and in large projects it will get on your nerves. The GNU build system
instead requires you to write @file{Makefile.am} files that are much more terse
and easy to maintain.
@item
Support for test suites. You can very easily write test suite code, and
by adding one extra line in your @file{Makefile.am} make a @code{check}
target available such that you can compile and run the entire test suite
by running @code{make check}.
@item
Automatic distribution building. The GNU build tools are meant to be used
in the development of @dfn{free software}, therefore if you have a working
build system in place for your programs, you can create a source code 
distribution out of
it by running @code{make distcheck}.
@item
Shared libraries. Building shared libraries becomes as easy as building
static libraries.
@end itemize

The Autotools package complements the GNU build system by providing the
following additional features:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Automatic generation of legal notices that are needed in order to
apply the GNU GPL license.
@item
Automatic generation of directory trees for new software packages, such that
they conform to the GNITS standard (more or less).
@item
Some rudimentary portability framework for C++ programs. There is a lot
of room for improvement here, in the future. Also a framework for
embedding text into your executable and handling include files accross
multiple directories.
@item
Support for writing portable software that uses both Fortran and C++.
@item
Additional support for writing software documentation in Texinfo, but also in 
LaTeX.
@end itemize
Autotools is still under development and there may still be bugs. At the 
moment Autotools doesn't do shared libraries, but that will change in the
future.

This effort began by my attempt to write a tutorial for Autoconf. It involved
into @emph{``Learning Autoconf and Automake''}. Along the way I developed
Autotools to deal with things that annoyed me or to cover needs from my
own work. Ultimately I want this document to be both a unified introduction of
the GNU build system as well as documentation for the Autotools package.

I believe that knowing these tools and having this know-how is very important,
and should not be missed from engineering or science students who will one 
day go out and do software development for academic or industrial research. 
Many students are incredibly 
undertrained in software engineering and write a lot of bad code.
This is very very sad because of all people, it is them that have the 
greatest need to write portable, robust and reliable code. I found from
my own experience that moving away from Fortran and C, and towards C++
is the first step in writing better code. The second step is to use
the sophisticated GNU build system and use it properly, as described
in this document. 
Ultimately, I am hoping that this document will help
people get over the learning curve of the second step, so they can be
productive and ready to study the reference manuals that are distributed
with all these tools. 

This manual of course is still under construction. When I am done constructing
it some paragraph somewhere will be inserted with the traditional run-down of
summaries about each chapter. I write this manual in a highly non-linear
way, so while it is under construction you will find that some parts 
are better-developed than others. If you wish to contribute sections of
the manual that I haven't written or haven't yet developed fully, please
contact me. 

Chapters 1,2,3,4 are okey. Chapter 5 is okey to, but needs a little more
work. I removed the other chapters to minimize confusion, but the sources
for them are still being distributed as part of the Autotools package
for those that found them useful. The other chapters need a lot of rewriting
and they would do more harm than good at this point to the unsuspecting reader.
Please contact me if you have any suggestions
for improving this manual.

Remarks by Marcelo: I am currentrly updating this manual to the last release 
of the autoconf/automake tools.
